Hi everyone, James here. Now, before we start this week's show, which is another
working from home episode, where we recorded in all of our different homes around the country.
I just want to say I hope everyone's all right. I hope that you're all staying indoors. I hope
you're all looking after your family and friends. But there's just one little bit of news that I
wanted to say, which we mentioned last week, but that is that we have re-released the second year
of No Such Things A Fish for free on the internet. So, if you go to the place where you normally
get your podcasts, you will see episodes 53 to 104 and they were not there in the past. So,
there's hours and hours of fun on there. I hope you enjoy them. But one more thing about that is
if you would like something a little bit extra, then you can go to No Such Things A Fish.com
and you can find the details of our audio cassette. Now, this is not any normal audio cassette.
You can't put it in your cassette player if you still have one. It is a USB. That USB has all of
those episodes, like I said, which are now up for free. But it also has an exclusive show that we filmed
live in the QI offices, so you can see exactly what our office is like. And, I mean, apart from that,
it's a really beautiful little cassette, which is really an awesome thing to have on your shelf and
your house. So, enjoy the show. Hope everything's good. Get the cassette, if you fancy it. We'll see you
all on the other side. Okay, on with the podcast.
Hello and welcome to another work from home episode of No Such Things A Fish A Weekly Podcast.
My name is Dan Schreiber. I am sitting here with Anna Chazinski, Andrew Hunter Murray and James
Harkin. And once again, we have gathered around our microphones with our four favorite facts from
the last seven days. And in no particular order, here we go. Starting with fact number one,
that's my fact. My fact is NASA fixed its Mars probe by getting it to whack itself with a shovel.
Did NASA send a shovel with the probe, just in case it needed something to whack itself with,
like in a cartoon? And did NASA once they had it hitting itself with a shovel? Did it go? Stop
hitting yourself mate. Stop hitting yourself. So, whack is, as James pointed out to me in an email,
not the correct term. Technically, it was a little push. It was a little shove, but it's been reported
as a whack by most of the media. I wouldn't call it a shove. It was a gentle caress.
Yes. NASA fixed its Mars probe by gently caressing it with a shovel. Stop caressing yourself.
No, really, stop it. We can see the video. Oh, shit. Okay. Sorry. I'll put that away.
So, yeah. So, this is the Mars probe that landed late 2018. It was in November, and it's the Mars
Insight mission. And the idea is that it's going deep into the interior of Mars, which has never
been done before. All previous missions have just looked at the landscape, taken bits of soil.
This one's drilling down to tell us about the planet. As NASA actually puts it on its own website,
it's the first mission to give Mars a thorough checkup since the planet formed 4.5 billion years
ago. So, it's a beautiful little thing that they're trying to test out here. And as they were using
the machine that was drilling down, the drill itself, which is called the mole, suddenly got stuck,
and they couldn't work out why. And this happened in March of last year. And so, for whole year,
they've desperately been trying to work out how we can get this shovel to work again,
because it's only gone something like 35 centimeters into the ground when it's meant to go
a full three to five meters roughly. So, they have no idea what to do, and they've been thinking
a whole year they've had labs set up where they've tested every scenario of what they could do.
And the answer, finally, that came to them, is just give it a little caress. And it might work
and it has. So, it's working again. Yeah, initially, they tried to caress it on the side, didn't they?
Because they tried to move it to the side of the hole, which it was drilling. And that might give
it a bit more purchase. But then they decided they're going to have to push down on it. And the problem
is that there is a massive tether. So, the mole is attached to the main probe with a piece of wire.
And what they didn't want to do was push that and then damage the tether and then not be able to do
anything with it. Because if you damage that, then there's no mulling, there's no nothing. And it's
also, it's not a drill. It's kind of a drill would spin round, right? Wait, James, did you just say
this is not a drill? This is not a drill. So, a drill would spin round. But there's nothing for
it to grab onto. So, you can't kind of spin round like a drill. It's kind of an up and down thing.
So, it kind of pulls itself up and then slams itself down and hopefully makes it a little bit in.
And then it keeps doing that again and again and again and again and hopefully gets about three or
four metres in there. Do you guys know why it's called insights? Because they are citing the inside
of Mars. I think, well, it's a clever double play on words. So, NASA is just full of these stupid
acronyms where it obviously gives stuff a name and then thinks, well, we better attribute,
you know, something to each of those initials. So, it's called insights. It stands for
interior exploration using seismic investigations, geodesy and heat transport. And it actually had to
have a name change. So, it used to be slightly more catchy than that. It was originally called the
Geophysical Monitoring Station, which was Gens, but NASA suddenly went, oh, go, we've already got one
of those in the working. So, they had to change its whole name so that it didn't coincide with another one.
Do you know the insiders won an Emmy? That's it. No, before. It won an Emmy for Outstanding
Original Interactive Program. So, NASA did some coverage of this landing and of its drilling and
shuffling and all that kind of stuff. And you could go online and you could interact with the show.
And it won an Emmy for it. It was a bad year for TV that year, wasn't it? It wasn't that year, yeah.
And one other thing about insight, and do you know that they have named a rock on Mars?
Oh, okay. So, when it landed, when the insight landed, it kind of knocked a little rock. It's only
about the size of a golf ball, and it rolled about three feet away. And do you know what they named this rock?
Okay. They named it after a famous thing. A famous thing. Did they name it after a rock star?
After some famous people. Oh, the Rolling Stones. Correct. Because it was a Rolling Stone.
Wow. They've named this one tiny rock of Mars, which is about the size of a golf ball. They've named
it after the Rolling Stones. It's almost more of an insult naming that after the Rolling Stones.
It really is. It's not like naming a star or a, you know, a moon or something, is it? And it's named
after all the Rolling Stones. They haven't picked one. That one rock is now just the full band.
It's called the Rolling Stones Rock. Right. Although they could have called it the Rolling Rock
or the Rolling Stone, because that's effectively what it is. Yeah. But they've just decided
Rolling Stones Rock. Did they observe whether the Rolling Stone has gathered any moss?
Well, we might come to moss later in this show. Oh, it's boilers, boilers.
Just this was a very, very low-tech solution that they use. The Wacker, Spade, Shovel,
Moll thing. It's Wacker Molls. They just call it Wacker Moll. We've already got to pay
caress a Moll, Anna. Sorry. That's a very different game.
Anyway, this was a very low-tech solution. So there was another one I found during the Apollo 11
mission. And this was when they'd all got back on the lunar module and they hadn't yet pressed the
button to say take us back to Earth. And Armstrong was wearing his backpack on the module. And it smashed
into the switch. There was one switch they needed to turn on the engine and begin the flight back to earth.
And he was wearing his big, clunky space backpack. And it just broke the whole switch off.
Like, it was fine because they just shoved a felt-tipped pen that Buzz Aldrin had been using. Don't
know why he had a felt-tipped pen on the Apollo 11. But you do. If you watch the moon footage when
Neil Armstrong turns round, it says dickhead on his back. That's what that was for. He still keeps
that pen on him to this day, Buzz Aldrin. He stops. Yeah, he takes it everywhere. He goes, yeah,
it's still working. Yeah, it's still got ink. It's still... In many ways, there's more impressive
than the Moon lab things. I don't suppose he still uses it. No, he carries it as his lucky charm.
It was the thing that got them off the moon. Because when we met him, Dan, you did have the word dickhead
on your back, but that wasn't him who wrote it. No, I'm still trying to find who did that. It's got
similar handwriting to you, James, but I don't want to make any accusations. There's interesting,
there's a... I found a fun term for the idea of whacking something to make it work again, which is
percussive maintenance. It's a thing that actually is recommended by so many different people,
people who work in the electronics industry. There was a whole thing about the fact that if a
soldiered connection needed to reconnect, sometimes it would lose its connection. Just by whacking it,
you could make it reconnect. There's been so many examples of percussive maintenance throughout
the years in NASA Territory Skylab when that went up. There was a bit of a problem on the outside
of it and the way that the astronauts fixed that was during a spacewalk was to hit it and that made
it work again, so that was very useful. But then there was also this great airplane called the Blackbird,
the SR-71 Blackbird. Have you guys heard of this? This is a bird. Sorry, this is a plane. No, it's
Superman. So this is a plane that flew so high and fast that when it was up there, the body of
the plane would stretch because of the materials would stretch. Absolutely. Can I just repeat what you
just said? You said so it went so fast that the body would stretch because the body would stretch.
I didn't expect for this to get picked up. I don't know where to go from here. That was not an
acceptable explanation. Dan, is it the case that the pilots will be sitting at the controls and
then suddenly they go, "Whoa!" And then they'll be sitting at the third row. Is it the people who are on
the plane are going, "I've got a lot more legroom than I used to." Well, I thought that was a
thing with planes that when you go to a certain altitude, materials, construction, shrink, I thought
that was a classic thing. You've got to collect more information on it in order to elucidate it for
the rest of us who don't know about it. Well, let's imagine that let's just accept that this
grew a trunk. No, we're not accepting it. Okay. Well, I'm ready to accept it. Come on. Let's accept
that this thing is stretched, like, stretch Armstrong. So the idea was that they built a plane
whereby the panels didn't necessarily meet on the ground. There was a gap between them so that when
it got to that height and it stretched, they would lock into each other and then it could continue
flying in perfect harmony at that height. When it landed back on the ground, they would then
bash it back into shape of making those gaps again for the next flight. Hang on, I'm a bit
confused now about how if the panels didn't meet on the ground, and then it stretched apart. It's a good,
I know what you're going to say, yeah, it's a good question. Are you sure it didn't squash? It feels like,
because it would be so cold up there, because it's a lot colder in the sky, it feels like the materials
would shrink. Yeah, it's another good point. Well, it sounds like an amazing plane. It sounds like
a hell of a plane. I'm sorry, I didn't get to fly. You know how things get faster than the speed of
light? Maybe it's that thing? Maybe it's the Einstein thing. I can only thank you all for trying to
help me out with it. I don't think we're going to get anywhere constructive. Did you know there's a
guerrilla suit on the ISS? What for? For fun. Yeah, they just wear it sometimes on the ISS.
Isn't that the least practical thing you've ever heard of being sent up there? And so it's not
sort of back up space suit. They run out of space suit. Imagine the pictures coming from the next time
that people go on the moon, and you got three of them in space suits. Some of them guys like
Arthur Faxx, I don't know how to do the guerrilla suit, I'm like, we're going to enjoy the short show.
In 2013, there was a hole in the ISS, and it was probably caused by a tiny micro meter, right?
The hole was just a few millimeters to a few centimeters wide, and they plugged it using an
astronaut's thumb. So did the astronaut have to stay next to the wall for the rest of the mission? He's
still there. He's still there, yeah. No, they cut his thumb off, no, eventually use some sealant,
but just until they managed to get their correct tools there, he had to stand there with his thumb in the
die. Wow. That's great. Very cool. What's the story about the Netherlands dying in the person
who shoved their thumb in it to stop the whole country flooding? That's what you just said is the
whole story. That's it. That's the story. It was well told, I thought. Can I just talk about one more
low fine NASA fix? It's one of the best. It's in 2012 when the ISS was repaired with the toothbrush.
So yeah, this was that they they have four units on the outside that power the ISS and they're
covered in solar panels, and one of them broke. And so the space space people, the what do you call them?
Astronauts. The astronauts had to climb outside to fix it, but the bolt was stuck because it gathered
so much space dust that they couldn't quite get a handle on the bolt properly, and they didn't
have to get rid of the space dust. They were like, well, we need some sort of little kind of brush,
sort of hard stiff, and they use a toothbrush, and I don't know how they decided which astronaut
sacrifice their toothbrush, the sake of this bolt, but they brushed all the dust off. And then after
that, you're sort of brushing your teeth with space dust, which is probably, it's probably worth
the sacrifice. It feels like it would be more abrasive than a normal toothbrush. Yeah.
Might help you brushing your teeth with space dust. It could be the new thing. Coldgate might be about
to release the next space dust and toothpaste. Here's another tip. If you have a gap in your teeth,
just go up to very high altitude. Okay, it is time for fact number two, and that is James.
Okay, my fact this week is that we don't know what the Greek philosopher Plato's real name was.
Plato was his wrestling nickname. So this is from historian Diogenes Laertius, who wrote a lot about
Plato, and he said that his name came from broad shoulder, which is what Plato means, and that it was
due to his physique, because he had big muscles. He was known as being a wrestler. He apparently
competed at the Ismian Games. And we don't really know what his actual first name is. According to
Diogenes Laertius, it might have been Aristocles, which means best reputation, but we don't really
have much historical evidence for that. So most people think that probably isn't true, but we do
think that probably he got his name Plato because he was broad-shouldered. So I read there's three
possibilities for why he got called Plato. In that same category, one was broad-shoulders,
one was possibly breadth of eloquence, but my favorite one is that he had a massive forehead.
That's the third one. Did he? That's supposedly had a very wide forehead, and that might have been
why he got called that. The thing he took part in sounds really intense, this thing called the
Pancrataion, which is it's a kind of fighting where you can do everything pretty much, except
biting people and gouging out their eyes. It's a bit like Mix Martial Arts, and it's so violent
that when the Olympics came back, it was the only ancient Olympic event that was not brought back.
And the Archbishop of Leon said, "We allow all events to be reinstated except Pancrataion."
And that's what Plato was doing. He was doing the ultra-violent thing. Although he was doing the least
violent of this admittedly extremely violent practice, wasn't he? He was up there, but not quite peak.
Boxing was maybe the worst, and then the wrestling was seen as the wimp settlement of Pancrataion, I think.
But you still had people like the other Nicknick wrestling nickname I found was Mr. Fingertips,
who was a four-century BC wrestler in the Pancrataion, and he was called Mr. Fingertips because his
strategy was every time a game started, he'd bend the opponent's fingers back until they snapped,
and then that usually would mean that they caved immediately. Wow. That is a pretty basic move in
wrestling, isn't it? It's all the one ahead of pulling someone's hair, or like kneeling down behind
them and then getting someone to push them over. I don't know, it's pretty good. If you're doing a
thumb war and you immediately break your opponent's thumb, then the thumb war is one of that point. I
don't know. I always think bending people's fingers back is like a Chinese bird. It's a bit cheap,
you mean? It's not fair play. It's a bit playgroundy. Yeah. It's a seminal move in modern-day
WWF and WWE wrestling. What, breaking someone's fingers, holding their hands and gripping them
and bending them, it can lead to 10 minutes. Honestly, it's a biggie in the world of wrestling.
Is that serious, Stan? Yeah, yeah. It's a big... They've burned each other's fingers back.
Yeah, yeah, it's a move that you see a lot. It's almost a way of the wrestlers during a big match,
getting their breath back together. It's their break moment, but they really bring the theatrics.
It just makes it look like you're doing one of these country dances where someone skips underneath
the arch there. I wonder if, you know, modern-day boxing and so on, half of the whole thing is the
smack talk that happens, you know, the taunting and so on. I'm just wondering what Plato's smack talk
would be like, because he would dish out new philosophical ideas that would crush your whole
understanding of the earth. How could you fight once you've been told about existence in your place
in the universe? I don't know. I think it's particularly easy to punch that guy in the face to be honest.
He might have shouted that you were a featherless biped. That was one of his human slams.
That was how he defined man, and I think it was sort of saying we're really no different from
creatures in a lot of ways, but then he came up against Diogenes the cynic, who said that's a
ridiculous way to define man, and he brought to Plato a live chicken and plucked it in front of his
very eyes. Wait, sorry, he plucked the chicken live, because if so, Diogenes has a lot of questions to
answer. I think it's better than killing a chicken just in order to pluck it to make a philosophical point.
I think it's tough to pluck a live chicken. I think that's a real skill. I've never tried,
but frankly, he should have been called Diogenes the optimist if he thought he was going to get away.
Maybe he was a wrestler too and got it in a headlock or something. That's Plato held out,
but Plato was forced to amend his definition of man to a featherless biped with broad flat nails.
That distinguishes us from the chicken. Does that mean like finger nails and toenails and stuff?
It just means basically, I think he looked for the first thing that we have that chicken doesn't.
Quite a lot to pick from. He went for the nails. But he went for the chickens have got nails.
But they don't know. They've got bendy-like questions. Oh yeah, that's true, yeah. They're not
flat. Wow, it feels like a bit of a reach from Plato at that point. But here's what I'm thinking,
right? He said broad flat nails. Plato means broad. We don't know where the broad bit comes from,
maybe he had extremely broad nails. He just had really flat fingers. Maybe that's where he got his
nails. Just the first thing you noticed about him. Diogenes, if Diogenes was taking the piss out of
you, I think that's pretty bad because he lived in a barrel. Didn't he? Yeah, he did. If someone's
coming up to you taking the piss and it's like, mate, you live in a barrel. He lives in a barrel.
And he's a cynic. Was he Oscar the Grouch? Who's this? He basically, oh my god, he basically was.
I think Oscar the Grouch is based on him. I think he was just trying to show the vanity of
human vanity, you know. Yeah, he lived in a jar to tell humans that they were all
dickheads. Wait, a jar or a barrel? Because I think a jar is worse. A jar of smaller, normally.
Yeah. It's called a jar usually, but I think it was quite a large one. I don't think he squeezed
himself into like a jam jar. Yeah. Well, he also, he masturbated in his barrel. Oh no.
Well, I hope it wasn't a jar then because that would be a hell of a view to everyone passing by.
People didn't find that amusing and he used to defecate in theatres and stuff, didn't he?
Wait, he was trying to excuse society, I think, is the point. I might be wrong about this because I
don't know much about diabetes, but I think that's what he was trying to do. And he was trying to go
and get societal norms. Yeah. And he lived in a barrel, but then he still needed to masturbate because
he was, you know, he had urges and he couldn't leave his barrel. So we had to do it in a barrel, but
people didn't like it very much. Damn, why did you say just that it was so, it was so particularly
bad to masturbate in the jar. Well, your barrel, no one's going to see inside. You can do that in private
in your barrel. Your jar, your David Blaining it. People are going to come and visit to see what you're
up to. Sure, did David Blaine do that? If I'd known that, I would have watched his whole, you know,
stuck in a box gig. I'm not sure if he did. Did he leave the jar to go into the theatre to have a poo?
Or did he have the jar taken into the theatre? Well, like roll it along like a hamster wheel.
Yeah. And then sort of poo out of the end of it. I think this might have been at two different stages
of his life. I think he might have been past his barrel years. So he's pooing in the fit of years.
You've got to keep it fresh for people, haven't you? You've got to keep sticking up. He famously,
the thing about masturbating was he always said it because I think he begged for food, baby.
And yeah, he said it'd be better if I could satisfy my hunger by rubbing my belly in the same way
that I satisfy my sexual needs by rubbing my genitals. That was his saying. Wow. That was his catchphrase.
Pretty bold decision by the Sesame Street writers. The phase Oscar the Grinch on his gun.
There are a lot of unedited scenes in that. He actually is quite interesting. He gave an explanation
for the origin of the word cynic, diogenes. So someone said why do they call you diogenes the cynic?
And it meant diogenes the dog-like as it's from the same river. It's like canine.
Right. And I think he said. So just do a poo wherever I want.
I just shit everywhere. No, he said it's because I fall upon those who give me
anything and bark at those who give me nothing. That cynicism, that's where that's coming from,
according to him. That's interesting.
Okay, it is time for fact number three and that is Andy. My fact is that the first ever
internal combustion engine was partially powered by explosive moss.
Wow. Oh god. Now people who listen to his podcast might not know about
add these obsession with moss because we've never let him do a moss fight before.
But for one of our books, was it the last book we did or the one before?
It was the one before. Yeah. Book of the year 2018 maybe. We had an article on club moss and it was
and these absolute fave. It was the longest article in the book at the time of submission
and weirdly it was the shortest but it actually made it to print. So revenge time. So this is an
internal combustion engine powered by small internal explosions and the thing which provided
the explosions was this moss. The machine was called the pyreon of four and it was patented in 1807
which I find unbelievably early as in the patent was signed by Napoleon for this machine.
And it was patented by a French inventor called Nissefore Niepse and this machine ran
a boat. The engine was attached to a boat and it was full of lycopodium dust which was from a
particular species of club moss and it's very explosive this stuff because it has lots of surface
area and it's 50% fat so it goes bang quite readily when it's supposed to flame and there was a boat
going around up and down rivers. That's incredible. I didn't look into this specific one and it
actually powered a boat but I think it was quite a small boat wasn't it? It wasn't a huge boat,
was it? Was it on a model boating pond? It wasn't a model boat. It was not because I did read
one place that said it was a toy boat but I couldn't tell whether it was or not. I mean all boats are toy
boats if you're a giant. Okay it wasn't a massive boat. I think let's go that far. But it wasn't
only a centimetre long. It was somewhere in between the two. It was somewhere in between a centimetre
at the Titanic. Yeah exactly. That was it. It clarified that for me. Thank you. It was pretty clever
how it worked though wasn't it because it would use the energy from this combustion engine and it
would suck water in from the front and push it out of the back and then it would use that movement
to power it forward. Yeah it was very clever. And just on a little tangent, Niepse, the inventor,
it was him and his brother who did it. Niepse is also the man who produced one of the first ever
photographic images 20 years later. Imagine being at the beginning of those two technologies.
Did he use the photographic flash in its early days then wasn't it and they used all sorts of
explosives and I think they used this in photography and flash photography and I wonder if he
used that. Was he a one-trick pony and he only ever used his club monster? I don't know. I think his
photography being as it was the very very first one that ever existed was before flashes to be honest.
The first one that he did, it was called The View From The Window at Legra and it was in 1826
and the exposure time was eight hours so I think flash would have helped much in that case. Don't blink,
don't blink. And the light was a problem because they didn't have flashes but they used the light
of the sun but obviously the sun is not in the same place for eight hours and so if you look at this
picture it looks a bit like a charcoal etching to be honest. It's not 4K but you can see the sunlight
on the left hand side and the right hand side because of the amount of time it took to expose.
Can I just say about club monster quickly? I just want to formally apologise Andy. It's amazing.
Thank you. Thank you. I watched an amazing video by a buddy of ours, Mutual Body of the podcast Steve
Mold from the Festival of Spoken Nerd where he has powder, a powdered version of it and showing
just how hydrophobic it is. So the idea is that you could dip your hand into a big body of water
if you have the powder just laying on top of the surface area and come back out your hand will be
sort of latexed a bit. It looks like you've gone marigold glove but you'll have a completely dry
hand that you can powder off. I mean it's an extraordinary substance. I've never heard of that before.
And you can set fire to water using it. It's so extremely flammable and it coats the water
without being absorbed by it so you can sort of pour water covered in club moss spores out of a jar
and then set fire to it and it looks pretty cool. There are lots of uses so it was as Anna said it was
used for flash powder for photographers before they invented flash bulbs. It was also used to coat
suppositories. I'm not exactly sure why. Is it the same reason as your hydrophobic thing as in
basically you know what I've been to stick to it basically? Yes, in fact it would be that because
it was also used as a coating for condoms then because it was used specifically to stop the latex
and condoms from sticking to the rest of the condom. This is before we had modern condoms.
You said condoms a lot of time in that sense. It felt very, felt very racy saying that all those times.
I suppose the problem is basically you're using spores and it's not a good idea to put spores
in your vagina or anus. Is that in case you give birth just sort of a moss human hybrid?
No, it's in case it goes off like a flash bulb. It's balloons inside you and that actually is where
the term flashing used to come from because women used to go around parks and then open their big
raincoats and it would be like a camera flash. That's incredible. Amazing etymology, I never knew that.
I'm not, I'm not buying it. I knew you were trying to make me believe that and I'm not buying it.
No, Dan, it's true. It's true. Dojo needs the cynic used to stick his bum out of the barrel and
you go, hey, look at this bang. No, but yeah, James, you're absolutely right. Sticking spores in
yourself is a bad idea, but this moss was even used to coat surgical gloves. So you would literally
have it decide to go in the internal organ to people. But you wouldn't need the glove, right? If you
were a doctor doing a finger at the bum check, you would just need to coat one finger in this club
moss and you say, well, you're saving four unused fingers of a glove. So, you know, that's handy.
From what you're saying, it sounds like if you're a doctor, then you could use a glove five times
in five different bottoms because you got five fingers. Is that, is that what you're saying? That's
literally what I'm saying. Yeah. Oh, could you say no offense, mate. Honestly, it's just I only
have the middle finger left. I only have the thong left. I know I've got broad nails.
They call me play. Do you know some people who like moss are the Japanese?
Yes. My Japanese friend is obsessed with it. Is that true data point? Yeah. Yeah. She goes around
collecting it. That's so interesting because I read this on the internet and I thought, if I say
there's probably lots of Japanese people right in as they were not obsessed with moss. So I'm so glad
that we have at least one datum. But there was a book written in 2011 called moss is my dear friends
and it sell 40,000 copies in Japan. And these days you can get moss themed drinks and you can get
like a ring which has moss in it. So instead of like a diamond, it sprouts out a little bit moss.
And actually the Japanese national anthem contains the word moss. Does it? It genuinely does.
It goes, "May your world go on for thousands of years until pebbles merge into one giant rock
that's covered with moss." That's great. It probably sounds better in the original language.
I do think so, yeah. So moss, actual moss, which is a club moss is an actual moss,
but actual moss is a real lifesaver. So it was used a lot in the First World War on wounds because
they ran out of bandages. So many people were getting injured. A lot of exposed flesh, a lot of stuff
was rotting and they suddenly realized they could stuff a wound with moss. And first of all, it's
incredibly good at absorbing liquid. So if you're bleeding, it's very good at absorbing that. It can
absorb 22 times its own weight in liquid. It's twice as absorbed of as cotton. And it's because 90%
of the cells in moss are dead. So they're just like water bottles waiting there to be filled.
And also it makes the environment around it really acidic, which makes it sterilizing. So it also
sterilizes wounds. So if you get a little soft, shove some moss in it. I think is it a very specific kind
of moss that they use. I can use any old, I can't use any old moss. It's fagnum moss, isn't it? Yeah.
Fagnum's awesome. They used to use it for diapers as well. Ancient cultures would put it sort of
in a bag like casing and put it around the children. So when they went to the toilet, acted the same.
It's another reason why Diogenes kept it in his barrel, isn't it?
Fagnum is really good. So there are about 380 species. It's a whole genus, it's fagnum moss.
But in the first world war, they had to harvest it from peat bogs because peat bogs are largely
fagnum moss basically. And by the end of 1916, they were making a million moss dressings every single month.
Wow. So it's a huge endeavor to create all that stuff. Yeah, yeah.
It's fagnum is great. Fagnum is the main ingredient of peat and that is... What's your favourite? And
is it fagnum moss or club moss or just general mosses in general? I think more cake moss. It's fagnum.
It's not cake moss. I think it's fagnum. Imagine cake moss. Cake moss is your third favourite moss
I'm including moss from the IT crowd. I think cake is my fourth favourite moss. Cake doesn't even
list. Okay, it's time for our final fact of the show and that is Chazinsky. My favorite this week is
that we have arches in our feet for the same reason that we fold slices of peata if we do that.
Is it because feet are so delicious? The cheesy, they're cheesy. We don't want to spill any of the
cheese. It's to stop. The cheese falling off. Yeah. This is a thing that Americans do a bit more than
I think. The peats are folding. I think maybe because they have bigger slices. So you fold a slice of
pizza and it makes it stronger and a new study has just been done into foot arches and it's been
discovered that this is the reason for one of the arches in our feet and it's actually the lesser
appreciated arch. So this study is about you've got the big attention seeking arch right which is
the longitudinal arch which runs from front to back and then you've got the transverse arch
which runs the width of your foot and you can really see the transverse arch when you look at the
top of your foot. It's the lump on the top of your foot and essentially they've looked at that
and they applied lots of pressure to it. These scientists they got where do they got cadavers
and they put weights on them and then they cut the transverse arch to see what kind of weight they
could hold comparatively and they found that the stiffness of a foot is reduced by 40% when you cut
that transverse arch. So it's therefore stiffness. What is an arch made of? It's bone ligament,
tendony, all that shit. The usual shit that the body is made of. Okay. That's really helpful.
Thanks Dr. Arna. Well you know it's been a bone and ligament. The foot doesn't have a quarter of
the bones in your body. Both your feet combined. Have a quarter of the body's bones. So it's really
really important that I've feted this stiff. It's one of the things that really distinguishes us from
other great apes is that we have the arches in our foot generally which allow us to be bipedal
and to walk and run particularly over really long distances. So if you look at the feet of
chimps then they're completely flat and that means that they can grab onto trees and stuff like that
but they cannot run a marathon. So in your face chimps. Well I know what you're saying about in your
face chimps but what I was thinking is what would you rather have feet that let you climb a tree or
feet that let you run a marathon. It depends on what you're trying to escape from. Yeah. If you're
trying to escape from Polarachlif. Probably climbing a tree. If you're trying to escape from
Tarzan. Exactly. He probably beat you at a marathon as well. Yeah. Yeah, he definitely won. But actually
I think it doesn't matter whether you've got this thing or not. So there was a study of people who
visited the Boston Museum of Science and they studied all of their feet and they found that some,
I know, one of weird gig researchers just to hang around the museum and say hey can I give you a
feed. But they found that some people had a mid-tasal break. Okay. And what that means is that the middle
of the foot bends quite easily as you push yourself off the ground. So one in 13 people has weird
folding ape-like feet. And if you have this and you walk on a beach you might see there's more of
a ridge in the middle portion of your footprint which shows that that's where your foot basically
folds as you step. And most people don't know they've got this which is very exciting. I think it
would matter if you were doing a marathon every day. Yeah, that's true. If you're kind of doing a lot
of long distance running it would probably start to hurt quite a lot. Yeah, that's, yeah. Although
it hurts all the time anyway if you do lots of long distance running so you probably wouldn't notice.
That's fair enough. And like kind of says though the arch is a for stiffness. So if you didn't have an
arch going transversely so going from left to right and you had flat feet then you wouldn't have
any stiffness in your feet at all and they'd just be like floppy bits of cardboard. Yeah. That would
be a problem. Yeah, that's true. So Anna, also, if this applies to American pizzas which are much longer
than say a British pizza, if you have smaller feet do you need the arch as much? I guess you need
them less because you're bearing less weight. I mean it would be proportional. And it's actually a
thing called Gaussian curvature which is something that we briefly discussed years ago on the show
when we were talking about corrugated iron and it's the amazing effect that you'll all remember that
classic episode. I think it was in the 60s so we've just put a load of episodes back up for free and
I think it's one of those. It is. So I will be good news guys. It was an absolute classic of the genre.
I highly recommend the corrugated iron session and we talk partly about how the shape of that makes
it stronger and it's the same reason that for instance you can't crack an egg if you squeeze it
really hard and this is the thing that this guy called. I mean I think I can. I can. You can't. I can.
You can't. Look, I haven't seen an egg for weeks. I can't at the moment. I have an egg downstairs.
Can I run down and get it? Yeah. Don't talk me on camera by breaking one of your few available
stocks of eggs. You won't be able to break it. You can break it if you shove your thumb into it but if
you just squeeze it. If I just squeeze it, you will break it. Should I genuinely do it or should we
forget it and just move on? I mean it's an enormous waste of time because you won't be able to do it
or you'll cheat and shove your thumb in or bang it against your mouth. I'm not going to cheat.
And then you'll be able to become an egg. That's win-win, isn't it? It's win-win, you should do it.
You should put your face beneath it so that if you end up with egg on your face you actually won't
end up with egg on your face. If you do manage to do this at home, try it if you want as long as you
don't waste food. But if you've got an egg that's gone after it, sometimes you'll get an egg which
has got some kind of imperfections in it and it is possible if your egg is not, you know, if there's
problem with your egg. Here's the caveat. There we go. But most of the time it is impossible to break
an egg just by squeezing it. It is cool. Although weirdly I read that a way of really emphasising the
Gaussian curvature, the strength of it is to have a hyperbolic paraboloid which is basically having
something that's curved in two directions, a bit like our foot. And something that uses that is power
stations. So you know if you look at power station, it's curved or the cooling tower. A cooling tower,
yeah. It's sort of doubly curved because it's rounded but it's also got that curve going in.
It's the opposite of what we have on our feet. So in your feet, your curves are both going in
the same direction. Good point. So if you turn your toes in, then it's bending in the same way that
the left to right of your foot goes. I'm not explaining this very well. But it's more like a
pringle. If you think of a pringle, it kind of from top to bottom, it curves one way and then from left
to right, it curves the other way. That's why it's impossible to break a pringle if you hold it in
your hand and squeeze. I've tried it. I can't do it. This is my problem. This is my problem with
hyperbolic paraboloids. It's always used as the example. They go and pringles use this technology as
well. And it's like, what are you talking about? The entire selling point in pringles is that you
can crunch them. They wouldn't be nearly as crunchy if they were flat. Oh, yeah. That'll be disgusting.
I would hate to eat a flat pringle genuinely. Really? Yeah. That sounds like an off. It just
sounds creepy, doesn't it? You know what's even stronger? If you have a corrugated iron style
crisp, like a kai's kind of thing, a corrugated crisp, now that's a strong crisp. I can jump up and
down on one of those things for days and get nowhere. Have you guys heard of Douglas Morson? No. I was
just studying things about the souls of the feet. So he was an Antarctic explorer when he wasn't
Antarctic. He was Australian actually, but he was exploring the Antarctic in 1912. And he wasn't
bothering with the poll. He was doing the most ambitious exploration of Antarctica ever. You know,
thousands or hundreds of miles, at least, of Antarctica's very desert interior. He was trying to,
you know, explore and map it. Anyway, on his way back, with a hundred miles to go, his partner had
died. He discovered that the souls of his feet had completely detached from the foot above genuinely.
I don't think is that possible? There was blood and pus spurting out and just all the skin of the
souls of his feet had come off. So somewhere there's an actual footprint laying in the snow? Well,
what he had to do was he had to tape the dead souls back onto his feet and put six pairs of socks on
and then keep walking. Oh, wow. Well, anyway, he survived. He survived and he became a national hero and
he left another 46 years. So the story has a happy ending in some senses. He was lost for ages,
wasn't he? Wasn't he away for years? And his wife married someone else and then he returned
to up 12 years later and... That's the dishears you're talking about. That's sorry.
Surely when he came back, he would be like an inch shorter than when he left.
I would know my husband anyway and he was five, seven, ten, your five foot nine and a half.
So most of them on feet? Yes, please, yeah. Our feet are just really good. I think we should be more
proud of our feet and I think we should just bound trainers. This is, I've sort of been brainwashed
because there was that study that was quite famous in 2004 by that harbour professor and then a book
based on it called Born to Run, which is a really good book but sort of about how we are, we're born to
run and our feet are made for it. And if you look at, we did in this series of QI, the Raramuri people
in Mexico and they can run for hundreds and hundreds of miles and they just do it in as thinner sandal
as possible because the ideal way to run is just to have a very thin surface to protect you from
stones or needles and then just use your foot's natural strength. You can tell how fast a runner
you will be by how long your toes are. Can you believe this? Yes, sprinters have longer toes than
non-sprinters and that's partly because if you have longer toes your feet stay in contact with the
ground very slightly longer. Okay, is it also because like whoever gets to the end first it can be
any body part, can it, the cross is the line that determines the winner. So if you have massive clown feet.
That's why so many of the best sprinters are clowns.
Oh, it's who's saying bought in the lead but no wait, here's Bobo the clown behind him, he's going up fast.
Hey, do you know, you know Einstein famously didn't wear socks. Yeah, famously. Well, I think if
you asked anyone for one fact about Einstein, that's what that's why he won his Nobel Prize for,
wasn't it? Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's pretty famous, isn't it? He was a non-sock-wearing guy.
I had never heard that before. I think it's famous in the context of this podcast, I think, but yeah.
No, I've genuinely never heard that done. That's very interesting. Okay, so he's not wearing socks.
Well, we don't know, he never said the real reason but there is a thought that it's because he suffered
from excessive foot sweatiness. He was famous in the military circles for having sweaty feet.
To the point where he was not allowed to sign up for the Swiss military because they said that his
feet were too sweaty. They don't buy you from the military because you got sweaty feet.
He had flat feet, varicose veins and excessive foot perspiration was what's on the official report.
Maybe he would give away if they were trying to attack somewhere by night, like a surprise attack,
but then they were... Yeah, surely, then, if you have sweaty feet, you would wear socks because
that's going to soak up the sweat. I would wear socks lined with sphagnum moss, which can absorb
30 times, so weight and water. Yeah, no, as I say, he never said it was for that reason,
it just, it's an interesting thing to note. I think you wouldn't want to go around with wet socks,
but then you've just got wet shoes instead, right? Yeah, but the soul that inner padding is a bit more
of a, I think you could suck more water into that and not be wet. No, I mean, because the worst
thing about wearing no socks and trainers is the fact that it's too sweaty, although it does make
sense that the military wouldn't allow him in because that's why Prince Andrew was so desirable
to the military, wasn't it? An inability to sweat is really something that they do look for.
And interestingly, he's very good at holding pizzas when he's in pizza expressed because he's learned
the calcium curvature. We're talking about that.
Okay, that's it. That is all of our facts. Thank you so much for listening. If you want to get in
contact with any of us about the things that we've said over the course of this podcast, we can
all be found on our Twitter accounts. I'm on @Sriberland, Andy, @Andruhunterreb, James, @JamesHarkin,
and Shazinski. You can email podcast@QI.com, or you can go to our group account, which is @NoSuchThing,
or our website. NoSuchThing is a fish.com. We've got all of our previous episodes up there. In fact,
we have more than usual amounts of previous episodes up there. As we said at the top of the episode,
we've just re-uploaded 52 episodes. The second year of fish, so do check them out. And as we said
last week, guys, we really hope you're doing okay. Scary times out there, but take care of each other.
We'll be back again next week. See you then. Goodbye.
Can I just say as well, I'm pretty sure other has lost signal over that. Or the Clifnospagina
material is not working very well because she's currently completely still on the same pretty good point. That
took me a long time to notice. I wonder how long she's been gunned. I wonder how much she's... She's not gone,
she's just stunned.
[laughs]
[music]
(upbeat music)